---
date: 2015/08/17 16:00:00
title: Flock 2015 and being new in town
categories: fedora
---

I spent most of last week at [Flock 2015](http://www.flocktofedora.org) in
Rochester, NY. I had a blast and I tip my hat (fedora?) to everyone involved
in making the conference run smoothly. I didn't go to a huge number of sessions
(more on that below) but the sessions I did go to were superb. The talks I 
attended ranged from design (Future of Fedora Hubs) to security, to some ARM
discussion, to "What does Red Hat Want". My teammates also gave a few kernel
related talks where I sat in the audience and commented as necessary.
I recommend watching the videos when they come out.

For me personally, the hallway track was most useful. I joined Red Hat fulltime
back in April as part of Fedora Engineering to work on the kernel team. I had
zero experience with the Fedora community before I joined. When you switch
companies, you have to re-build and re-learn your internal network of who
everybody is. An open source community is like a completely separate company so
essentially you have two networks to contend with. Everyone at Red Hat and the
Fedora community has made me feel welcome in all respects but it's still work
to build a network.

So, how do you build that network? I work remotely so most of my interaction
is via e-mail, IRC, or the occasional laggy video call. This works remarkbly
well for getting things done. There's even room for fun in there depending on
the people involved. All that is part of building the network and it is very
valuable. Part of building a network is also feeling connected to that network,
and that's where I think face to face conferences are most valuable. This is
probably not actually news or a new idea. I think it's important to hilight
this though for retention in both open source communities and corporations.
If your employees or members don't feel connected to what you are doing, they
won't stay. There are certainly people out there who can feel connected
without going to a conference and meeting face to face, and making blanket rules
about attendance will certainly end poorly. There are very good reasons why
people do not want to attend conferences, especially in open source (a topic for
another blog post). There need to be other ways for people to feel engaged and
connected besides conferences. For me personally, going and talking to people
in person is one way I feel more engaged and enthusiastic about my work. 

So thanks again to everyone I met at Flock. It was great talking to you and I
hope to do it again. Tomorrow I leave for Linux Plumbers up in Seattle. I'll
probably write up something else when that is all done.
