---
date: 2016/11/08 11:00:00
title: Kernel Summit + Linux Plumbers 2016
categories: fedora
---
Last week was the annual kernel summit and [Linux Plumbers Conference](https://www.linuxplumbersconf.org/2016/)
in Santa Fe, NM. Like other conferences, this involved a bunch of scheduled
talks and lots of hallway track (and plenty of Mexican food).

- Monday was the invite only kernel summit. The morning was mostly process
talks. I brought up some discussion about the kernel.org bugzilla, mainly that
it is inconsistently used. The kernel is heavily biased towards e-mail and
anything that isn't e-mail tends to get ignored/used very begrudingly and
bugzilla is no exception. The power management maintainers really like the
bugzilla and actually respond, most other maintainers do not. This is the
problem: users who file a bug don't know whether to expect a reponse. I
generally discourage the use of the kernel.org bugzilla. The kernel.org
bugzilla will be getting an update soon so we'll see what happens after that.
[LWN](http://www.lwn.net) has better summaries of all the kernel summit stuff
than I can give.

- Paul McKenney gave a talk about a formal model for memory ordering. The
kernel has a [document](https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/memory-barriers.txt)
which explains how memory barriers and the like should be used in the kernel.
Despite the fact that this document says it is not a specification, it gets
treated like one. Several researchers have been working on actually formalizing
this document to be able to give an answer whether certain sequences of code
will work correctly. This doesn't have many day-to-day benefits for most kernel
developers but the work is very important from a research stand point.

- A bunch of people sat down for a meeting about what to do about the secure
boot patches. All the major distros are now carrying some form of the patches
so it makes sense to converge on one solution. This was a very productive
discussion and there is a much better path forward for those patches.

- There were several different MM sessions. Johannes Weiner spent a lot of time
talking about process thrashing. The current OOM killer does not do a great
job of detecting when processes are thrashing so processes may continue to
run instead of being OOM killed. He brain stormed some better ways to detect
these conditions, such as checking how frequently pages are being re-faulted.
Several people (including me) brought up some issues with the SLUB allocator.
The SLUB slow path is pretty slow ('glacial path' was the phrase used). SUSE
still uses the SLAB allocator but is looking at work to improve SLUB for
their needs.

- There was a mini conference about FPGA/Reprogrammable Logic Devices. There's
a growing interest in supporting FPGAs in the kernel as regular devices. Vendors
like Altera and Xilinx have been slowly adding support. There was a lot of
talk about standards which lead to a discussion about ACPI vs Devicetree for
the one billionth time. FPGAs are useful across the board from the embedded
world to servers so getting everyone on the same page is important. Lots of
new and interesting work.

- As part of the testing/fuzzing microconference, some developers from Google
talked about their tool Syzkaller. This is a more directed fuzzing tool which
tries to be slighltly more clever than random for generating system call
inputs and also generate share the program that caused the crash. Part of
this discussion led to a session on formalizing system calls. The goal was
to have specifications generated automatically for tools and possibly man
pages. There were some tentative conclusions reached so we'll see what happens
in the future.

- I gave a talk/rant about Ion at the Android microconferece. Ion has gotten
enough push back that I don't think it will ever be merged in its current form.
I called for a moratorium on new features to the existing architecture and to
work towards a new architecture that might be more acceptable by the community.
If we ignore the community aspects, Ion is an acceptable framework for Android.
Keeping major frameworks out of tree is not great for the Android ecosystem
so it really really really needs to be in tree and out of staging. I had some
good discussions and the DRM Graphics people seem to be very willing to
help shepard things along. This just leaves me doing actual work and not just
complaining. The hardest task.

- Lennart Poettering gave a talk about 'portable system services' which is
basically systemd services in something like a container. The concept is needed
but I remain skeptical about the idea of doing `systemctl start
http://my-completely-trusted-server/service.icb` to run services from anywhere.
This will be something to watch as it comes into Fedora.

- kdbus was rejected as an approach sometime last year and the developers
decided to start from scratch with a proposal for Bus1. They gave a very nice
talk discussion the existing IPC mechanisms and some of the trade offs with
each and then described their new Bus1 approach. It seemed to be reasonably
well received and it wasn't just a blind port of another possibly broken IPC
mechanism.

Once again, a great but very busy conference with tasks to follow up on.
