---
layout: post
date: 2015/11/08 16:00:00
title: Coffee Neuring 2015 number 5
category: bike, cofeeneuring2015
---
(This is a writeup for [Coffeeneuring 2015](http://chasingmailboxes.com/2015/09/19/coffeeneuring-challenge-2015-a-dream-within-a-dream/). It started out in a
google doc and is now moving here. The entries contain the actual date of
the adventure. The writeup is 1. where I went 2. the date 3. what I drank
4. More detailed ride story 5. total mileage)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/openlabbott/status/660863719266611201)

1. [Cupcake Royale on Pine](http://cupcakeroyale.com/)
2. November 1st
3. Mocha with whipped cream and a vanilla cupcake with coconut
4. Not quite as amazing as yesterday but still nice. It was 50F as opposed to
60F and wow do those 10 degrees make a difference. I was a bit saddle sore when
I first started but that fade very quickly. I’ll be glad when my long bike
tights arrive (and when Christmas comes with some bike stuff...) Achievement:
rode on the streets the entire time. Still not sure about doing it during busy
traffic time but quiet weekend mornings are nice. Down Mercer, down Westlake,
down Stewart. I think at least some of my hand problems are from having a death
grip on the bike handle when going downhill on Mercer. I was also feeling really
out of shape while riding down westlake which I didn’t feel at all yesterday.
Different gears? Either way, an excuse to bike more to build up stamina. Nice
empty bike rack outside. I also suspect most people don’t wander into cupcake
shops in Downtown Seattle on cold November days so not too surprised. Other
highlights: ducks and a very hungover Totoro at the bus stop. Happy day after
halloween!
5. 2 miles
