---
layout: post
date: 2015/11/08 16:00:00
title: Coffee Neuring 2015 number 6
category: bike, cofeeneuring2015
---
(This is a writeup for [Coffeeneuring 2015](http://chasingmailboxes.com/2015/09/19/coffeeneuring-challenge-2015-a-dream-within-a-dream/). It started out in a
google doc and is now moving here. The entries contain the actual date of
the adventure. The writeup is 1. where I went 2. the date 3. what I drank
4. More detailed ride story 5. total mileage)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/openlabbott/status/663084148580483072)

1. [Starbucks in University Village](https://goo.gl/maps/exKKneJZLWL2)
(I tried to find another coffee shop but I kind of failed. Why doesn’t the
Amazon bookstore have a coffee shop)
2. November 7th
3. Mocha and coffee cake
4. This was borderline [Type 2](http://kellycordes.com/2009/11/02/the-fun-scale/) fun.
It would have been solidly type 2 fun had I not had long biking tights.
Started out mid 50s and the temperature continued to drop. Lots of rain. I took
the same route as #4 up to Fremont. I paused around there to give my arm a
break. I think it’s getting stronger thanks to a little bit of home therapy and
not keeping a death grip on the handle bars. Took the [Burke-Gilman](http://www.seattle.gov/parks/burkegilman/bgtrail.htm)
trail east
towards University Village and UW. This is a really nice trail and I expect to
ride it more in the future. I took a minor detour to look at the Gas Works Park
(answer: it’s a park where there used to be some gas processing parts which are
still there for show. It might make a nice place to go practice hills sometime)
As I got towards UW, part of the trail was closed due to construction. This
threw me for a loop literally and figuratively because I don’t know the area.
Eventually made my way to University Village. I picked this spot because people
wanted to know what the Amazon Bookstore is like (answer: it’s a bookstore that
seems to be very targeted in what they are displaying and trying to sell). Ther
are 3 starbucks in this mall and no local coffee shops that I could find.
Plenty of bike racks available. By the time I was getting my coffee I was
thoroughly wet, and cranky by the time I was waiting for the bus to bring me
home. I either need to stop biking in the rain or get actual waterproof stuff.
I’m optimistic about being able to do this better in the future as I bike more.
5. ~6 miles (longest yet!)
