---
layout: post
date: 2015/11/08 16:00:00
title: Coffee Neuring 2015 number 3
category: bike, cofeeneuring2015
---
(This is a writeup for [Coffeeneuring 2015](http://chasingmailboxes.com/2015/09/19/coffeeneuring-challenge-2015-a-dream-within-a-dream/). It started out in a
google doc and is now moving here. The entries contain the actual date of
the adventure. The writeup is 1. where I went 2. the date 3. what I drank
4. More detailed ride story 5. total mileage)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/openlabbott/status/655794619465101312)

1. [Row House Cafe](http://rowhousecafe.com/) (I thought about trying to do an
all starbucks challenge because Seattle but I like this place too much)
2. October 18th
3. Small Mocha and brownie cookie thing with frosting in the middle. Waaaaay
too much sugar but so delicious
4. Some highs and lows.
	- Highs: Started out by biking straight towards downtown via 1st/3rd
	ave. This was a really nice ride down, the sidewalks weren’t too bad
	and I even rode in the street some. I think I’m getting more confident
	about riding in the street. Padded bike shorts helped a lot although I
	was still sore going out (I think taking most of this week and next
	week off might help). (most) of South Lake Union is really nice for
	biking minus some of the notes below. I biked all the way up the
	protected bike lane going under Aurora. Would have been better if I had
	more speed going into it I think. My path going home of cutting through
	Seattle Center is definitely a good one because it evens out some of
	the hills and the Seattle center is fun. I’m pleased I chose to bike
	back home instead of taking the bus back from Denny Way. I also saw
	another biker walking her bike some which made me feel better.
	- Lows: Denny Way is complete shite for biking. I’m not confident
	enough to bike in the street there yet and the sidewalks are garbage.
	That’s how I feel about most of downtown right now. The streets are
	also pretty unpaven in some places. I got turned around and found
	myself wanting to bike the wrong way down a street. I need to look at
	maps and plan out a better route. Got frustrated with the
	start/stop/getting lost and walked my bike quite a bit. SLU is
	alternately “Wow this is A+ biking” and “Where did this construction
	come from”. I also wish Westlake didn’t have street car tracks going in
	the right lane (might try the left).  I fell down while trying to bike
	under construction BS. Never doing that again. Why doesn’t the row
	house cafe have bike racks!
	- Goals for next time
		- Practice doing hand signals.
		- I need to find somewhere I can practice taking my hands off
		my bike.
		- Research some routes.
		- Drink water/eat something before starting out.
	5. 3.5 total with probably .5-1 mile of walking bike
