---
layout: post
date: 2015/11/08 16:00:00
title: Coffee Neuring 2015 number 7
category: bike, cofeeneuring2015
---
(This is a writeup for [Coffeeneuring 2015](http://chasingmailboxes.com/2015/09/19/coffeeneuring-challenge-2015-a-dream-within-a-dream/). It started out in a
google doc and is now moving here. The entries contain the actual date of
the adventure. The writeup is 1. where I went 2. the date 3. what I drank
4. More detailed ride story 5. total mileage)

[Tweet](https://twitter.com/openlabbott/status/663419323982065668)

1. [Zeitgeist Coffee](http://zeitgeistcoffee.com/) near Century Link field
2. November 8th
3. Latte and Almond Croissant. A+ for both.
4. It was actually not raining when I started out! I headed down Queen Anne Ave
which has a bike lane. Gave up on the bike lane because a) It was all cracked
b) covered in leaves c) Not wide enough. Biked over on Denny Way to 2nd Ave.
Denny Way on the street is much better than Denny Way on the sidewalk. My route
was basically straight down 2nd ave. It’s apparently taken me multiple rides
to figure out there is an ever so slight incline in Belltown between Denny Way
and Stewart Street. It’s not much but if you aren’t used to biking like I am it
is noticeable. Solution: bike more. 2nd ave has a nice protected bike lane for
almost all the way. This is great except for the part which is closed and
covered for construction. After an incident in SLU, I refuse to bike under
those things anymore. Zeitgeist has a bike rack right outside. Nice and empty.
Pioneer square and international district are now on my “come back here and
bike” TODO list. After coffee, I decided to experiment with taking Link transit
back to Westlake. I knew it could be done theoretically but practicing and
seeing how it works during low volume times are good. I couldn’t actually lift
my bike up to get it on the hooks so I just kept it on the ground. It turns out
taking the light rail was a good choice: it started downpouring right as I got
on the train. It was still down pouring when I got off and I got soaked enough
yesterday so I just took the bus back instead of experimenting with coming back through SLU. Great way to finish off the challenge.
5. ~3 miles

