---
layout: post
date: 2016/09/08 11:00:00
title: Success with interns
category: fedora
permalink: /blog/2016/09/08/success-with-interns/
---
Outreachy ended last month. Given this was the first time the
kernel team has tried to do this, I think it went well. I've been reflecting
on what makes an internship successful based on this past summer and other
experiences.

- Mentorship takes time. It needs to be accounted for when agreeing to mentor.
Life happens and you can't predict your time perfectly but if you have doubts
about your ability or willingness to commit, err on the side of not mentoring.
"rock-paper-scissors you get the intern" or "surprise you are mentoring[^1]" are
very bad ways to start off a mentoring experience.

- Mentorship is a skill. I don't always get it right but I work on getting
better every time. I ask for help with mentoring skills the same way I would
ask for help with a technical question.

- An internship is about learning. Work should be getting done but part of
the outcome of an internship is skills for the intern. Don't tie intern
deliverables to crucial deadlines.

- When I mentor an intern, I consider it one of my most important tasks. An
intern is going to have exactly one chance at this experience. I think of
this as a temporary management role in that it's my job to enable them to be
successful and make the most of the experience [^2].

- Have a plan set up. Set goals and outcomes and have a schedule of when
things will be completed. The schedule may change, but you should have one
in mind.

- Learn to give clear feedback and evaluate progress. There is no formula for
this (I've asked!) but you need to have some way to judge whether adequate
progress is being made and if not, what is causing issues. Both mentor and
mentee should be on the same page about how much progress is being made.

- Set up regular meetings at the beginning of the internship to check in and
see how things are going. Schedule more than you think you need until you are
sure things are going well. It's much better to cancel meetings you don't need
than not realize something is going wrong. Ask your mentee how they think
things are going and if they want to meet more/less.

- Know what it takes to be successful for the project. Programs like Outreachy
give a lot of leeway in projects. This means you need to be specific about
what kind of skills are needed. Set your application tasks to be able to gauge
if applicants can complete the tasks successfully. Know that aiming a project
at a 1st/2nd year student will take different mentoring skills from a project
for an almost new grad.

- Communicate why the project is important and how the work is going to be used
after the internship is over. Everyone wants to know that the work they are
doing is valuable in some way.

- Choose your tasks carefully. Tasks with a specific goal but multiple ways to
solve are best. Too open ended tasks can be frustrating for all involved but
there should be some chance for decision making. Just giving a list of tasks
and exactly how they should be completed isn't good for learning. Give your
intern a chance to propose a solution and then review it together.

- Speaking of review, code review is a skill. Model how to respond to code
review comments. Encourage interns to practice reviewing others code and
ask questions as well.

- Problem solving should be a discussion. Ask what they are stuck on and how
they think they should try and solve it. Don't just give the answer right away,
debugging skills are valuable everywhere and internships are a great opportunity
to spend time digging into a problem and really solving it.

- At the same time, be ready to jump in and help. Making slow progress is okay,
getting stuck is not. Learning how and when to ask for help is an important
skill so be on the look out for interns who still need to develop this skill.
Anticipate what could be trouble points and have a plan to mitigate if the
intern doesn't have a good solution.

- Model the change you want to see in the world. There's nothing like having
a new person around to make you think about what you could be doing better.
Show the best of yourself and your community/company.

- Follow up on their work post internship. Share with others what was
accomplished. Have a plan how it's going to be finished or used.

[^1]: Okay, it was more like "How did this conversation result in me becoming
a mentor." Not my finest hour.

[^2]: I've vowed to never accept a full-time management position unless I
think I can actually do the management parts properly. When you screw up people
management, you are screwing up something much more fundamental and important
than anything technical. This colors a lot of what I wrote here.
