---
layout: post
date: 2018/08/14 11:00:00
title: Flock 2018
category: fedora
permalink: /blog/2018/08/14/flock-2018/
---
Last week was [Flock 2018](https://flock2018.sched.com/). Highlights:

- I gave a talk on the relationship between the Fedora and RHEL kernels. The
short summary is that that the two kernels are not closely related, despite
the fact that they are supposed to be. I've been working with some people
inside Red Hat to figure out ways to improve this situation. The goal is to
have more Red Hat kernel developers participating in Fedora to make the Fedora
kernel more beneficial for future RHEL work. I talked about some of the
upcoming work such as syncing up core kernel configuration and packaging. This
all seemed fairly well received.

- RHEL + Fedora was a theme throughout many presentations. Josh Boyer and
Brendan Conoboy gave a talk about aligning Fedora and RHEL across the entire
OS. Some of this was about what you would expect (more testing etc.) but one
of the more controversial points was suggesting redefining what makes up the
system vs. applications. RPMs are nominally the smallest unit of a distribution
but this doesn't quite mesh with the modern concepts of self-contained
applications. You want to be able to update applications independently of
the underlying system and vice versa. The talk was fairly high level about
what to actually do about this problem but it generated some discussion.

- Kevin Fenzi gave a talk about rawhide. As a relative newcomer to the project,
I enjoyed hearing the history of how rawhide came about and what's being done
to keep it moving forward. I'll echo the sentiment that rawhide is typically
fairly usable, so give it a shot!

- Dusty Mabe and Benjamin Gilbert gave a talk about Fedora CoreOS. I've always
thought the CoreOS concept was a great idea and I'm pleased to see it continue
on. Some of the talk was a bit of a retrospective about what worked and didn't
work for CoreOS. Certain parts are going to be re-written. I enjoyed hearing
the upcoming plans as well as getting to meet the CoreOS team.

- Peter Robinson ran an IoT BOF. IoT is now an official Fedora objective and
has a regular release. Part of the goal of the BoF was to talk about what
it currently supports and what people want to do. Several people had
great plans for utilizing some older hardware and I look forward to seeing
more projects.

- Peter Robinson and Spot gave a talk on the Raspberry Pi. Support for this
device has come a long way and there's always [new things](https://nullr0ute.com/2018/04/the-raspberry-pi-3-b-in-fedora/)
happening. If you have a Raspberry Pi give it a shot!

- There was a session on Fedora in Google Summer of Code and Outreachy. Fedora
was extremely successful with its interns this past summer and it was great
to hear from everyone and the mentors. There is another round of [Outreachy](https://communityblog.fedoraproject.org/outreachy-mentors-winter-2018/)
happening soon as well.

Once again, a great time. Thanks to the organizers to putting on a fantastic
conference.
